Convert WebUSB article from WebFu (#4095)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/usb/index.md

immediately think of keyboards, mice, audio, video and storage devices. You're
right but you'll find other kinds of Universal Serial Bus (USB) devices out
there.

These non-standardized USB devices require hardware vendors to write native
drivers and SDKs in order for you (the developer) to take advantage of them.
Sadly this native code has historically prevented these devices from being used
by the Web. And that's one of the reasons the WebUSB API has been created: to
provide a way to expose USB device services to the Web. With this API, hardware
manufacturers will be able to build cross-platform JavaScript SDKs for their
devices.
But most importantly this will **make USB safer and easier to use by bringing
it to the Web**.

Let's see what you could expect with the WebUSB API:

1. Buy a USB device.
2. Plug it into your computer.
3. A notification appears right away, with the right website to go to for this
   device.
4. Simply click on it. Website is there and ready to use!
5. Click to connect and a USB device chooser shows up in Chrome, where you can
   pick your device.
6. Tada!

What would this procedure be like without the WebUSB API?

> - Read a box, label, or search on line and possibly end up on the wrong website.

Reviewer: In the next few steps I suggest a rewrite to make this follow the same standards as I've outlined above.

> - Have to install a native application.

Author: Done.
As noted by @kaycebasques, I'm now using "platform-specific" instead of "native"

> - Is it supported on my operating system? Make sure you download the "right"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If it's even supported on my operating system, verify that I've downloaded the right
```

Author: Done

  thing.

> - Scary OS prompts popup and warn you about installing drivers/applications from
>   the Internet.
> - Malfunctioning code harms the whole computer. The Web is built to [contain
>   malfunctioning websites].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Install the thing. If you're lucky, you'll get no scary OS prompts or popups
warning you about installing drivers/applications from the internet. If you're
unlucky, the installed drivers or applications malfunction and harm your
computer. (Remember, the web is built to [contain malfunctioning websites]).
```

Author: Done

> - Only use the USB device once? On the Web, the website is gone once you closed
>   tab. On a computer the code sticks around.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you only use the feature once, the code stays on your computer until you think to remove it. (On the Web, the space for unused is eventually reclaimed.)
```

Author: Done

> ## Before we start

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Before I start
```

Author: Done

This article assumes you have some basic knowledge of how USB works. If not, I
recommend reading [USB in a NutShell]. For background information about USB,
check out the [official USB specifications].

The [WebUSB API] is available in Chrome 61.

### Available for Origin Trials

In order to get as much feedback as possible from developers using the WebUSB
API in the field, we've previously added this feature in Chrome 54 and Chrome
57 as an [origin trial].

The latest trial has successfully ended in September 2017.

## Privacy and security

### HTTPS only

> Because this experimental API is a powerful new feature added to the Web, it is
> made available only to [secure contexts]. This means you'll need to build with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because of this feature's power, it only works on [secure contexts]. This means you'll need to build with
```

Author: Done

TLS in mind.

### User gesture required

> As a security feature, getting access to connected USB devices with
> `navigator.usb.requestDevice` must be called via a user gesture
> like a touch or mouse click.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a security precaution, `navigator.usb.requestDevice()` may only
be called through a user gesture such as a touch or mouse click.
```

Author: Done

### Feature Policy

> A feature policy is a mechanism that allows developers to selectively enable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A [feature policy](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Feature_Policy)
is a mechanism that allows developers to selectively enable
```

Author: Done

> and disable various browser features and APIs. It can be defined via a HTTP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and disable various browser features and APIs. It can be defined via an HTTP
```

Author: Done

header and/or an iframe "allow" attribute.

> You can define a feature that controls whether the usb attribute is exposed on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can define a feature policy that controls whether the usb attribute is exposed on
```

Author: Done

the Navigator object, or in other words if you allow WebUSB.

Below is an example of a header policy where WebUSB is not allowed:

```http
Feature-Policy: fullscreen "*"; usb "none"; payment "self" https://payment.example.com
```

> Below is another example of a different container policy where USB is allowed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is another example of a container policy where USB is allowed:
```

Author: Done

```html
<iframe allowpaymentrequest allow="usb; fullscreen"></iframe>
```

## Let's start coding

The WebUSB API relies heavily on JavaScript [Promises]. If you're not familiar
with them, check out this great [Promises tutorial]. One more thing, `() => {}`

> are simply ECMAScript 2015 [Arrow functions] -- they have a shorter syntax

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are simply ECMAScript 2015 [Arrow functions]. They have a shorter syntax
```

Reviewer: Do we still need to explain promises and arrow functions?

Author: As noted in https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/pull/4090/#discussion_r508911986, I've removed the explanation but kept links as developers interested in Bluetooth or USB may not necessarily be web developers.

compared to function expressions and lexically bind the `this` value.

### Get access to USB devices

You can either prompt the user to select a single connected USB device using

> `navigator.usb.requestDevice` or call `navigator.usb.getDevices` to get a list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`navigator.usb.requestDevice()` or call `navigator.usb.getDevices()` to get a list
```

Author: Done

of all connected USB devices the origin has access to.

> The `navigator.usb.requestDevice` function takes a mandatory JavaScript object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `navigator.usb.requestDevice()` function takes a mandatory JavaScript object
```

Author: Done

that defines `filters`. These filters are used to match any USB device with the

> given vendor (`vendorId`) and optionally product (`productId`) identifiers. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
given vendor (`vendorId`) and, optionally, product (`productId`) identifiers. The
```

Author: Done

`classCode`, `protocolCode`, `serialNumber`, and `subclassCode` keys can also be
defined there as well.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="./usb-device-chooser.png" class="w-screenshot" alt="Screenshot of the USB device user prompt in Chrome">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">USB device user prompt.</figcaption>
</figure>

For instance, here's how to get access to a connected Arduino device configured
to allow the origin.

```js
navigator.usb.requestDevice({ filters: [{ vendorId: 0x2341 }] })
.then(device => {
  console.log(device.productName);      // "Arduino Micro"
  console.log(device.manufacturerName); // "Arduino LLC"
})
.catch(error => { console.log(error); });
```

Before you ask, I didn't magically come up with this `0x2341` hexadecimal
number. I simply searched for the word "Arduino" in this [List of USB ID's].

The USB `device` returned in the fulfilled promise above has some basic, yet
important information about the device such as the supported USB version,

> maximum packet size, vendor and product IDs, the number of possible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
maximum packet size, vendor, and product IDs, the number of possible
```

Author: Done

> configurations the device can have - basically all fields contained in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configurations the device can have. Basically it contains all fields in the
```

Author: Done

[device USB Descriptor].

> For info, if a USB device announces its [support for WebUSB], as well as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By the way, if a USB device announces its [support for WebUSB], as well as
```

Author: Done

defining a landing page URL, Chrome will show a persistent notification when the

> USB device is plugged in. Clicking on this notification will open the landing page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
USB device is plugged in. Clicking this notification will open the landing page.
```

Author: Done

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="./web-usb-notification.png" class="w-screenshot" alt="Screenshot of the WebUSB notification in Chrome">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">WebUSB notification.</figcaption>
</figure>

> From there, you can simply call `navigator.usb.getDevices` and get access to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From there, you can simply call `navigator.usb.getDevices()` and access to
```

Author: Done

    console.log(device.manufacturerName); // "Arduino LLC"
  });
})
```

### Talk to an Arduino USB board

Okay, now let's see how easy it is to communicate from a WebUSB compatible
Arduino board over the USB port. Check out instructions at
[https://github.com/webusb/arduino] to WebUSB-enable your [sketches].

Don't worry, I'll cover all the WebUSB device methods mentioned below later in
this article.

```js
let device;

navigator.usb.requestDevice({ filters: [{ vendorId: 0x2341 }] })
.then(selectedDevice => {
    device = selectedDevice;
    return device.open(); // Begin a session.
  })
.then(() => device.selectConfiguration(1)) // Select configuration #1 for the device.
.then(() => device.claimInterface(2)) // Request exclusive control over interface #2.
.then(() => device.controlTransferOut({
    requestType: 'class',
    recipient: 'interface',
    request: 0x22,
    value: 0x01,
    index: 0x02})) // Ready to receive data
.then(() => device.transferIn(5, 64)) // Waiting for 64 bytes of data from endpoint #5.
.then(result => {
  const decoder = new TextDecoder();
  console.log('Received: ' + decoder.decode(result.data));
})
.catch(error => { console.log(error); });
```

> Please keep in mind that the WebUSB library we are using here is just

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please keep in mind that the WebUSB library I'm using here is just
```

Author: Done

implementing one example protocol (based on the standard USB serial protocol)
and that manufacturers can create any set and types of endpoints they wish.
Control transfers are especially nice for small configuration commands as
they get bus priority and have a well defined structure.

And here's the sketch that has been uploaded to the Arduino board.

```arduino
// Third-party WebUSB Arduino library
#include <WebUSB.h>

WebUSB WebUSBSerial(1 /* https:// */, "webusb.github.io/arduino/demos");

#define Serial WebUSBSerial

void setup() {
  Serial.begin(9600);
  while (!Serial) {
    ; // Wait for serial port to connect.
  }
  Serial.write("WebUSB FTW!");
  Serial.flush();
}

void loop() {
  // Nothing here for now.
}
```

The third-party [WebUSB Arduino library] used in the sample code above does
basically two things:
- The device acts as a WebUSB device enabling Chrome to read the [landing page
  URL].
- It exposes a WebUSB Serial API that you may use to override the default one.

> Let's look at the JavaScript code again. Once we get the `device` picked by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Look at the JavaScript code again. Once I get the `device` picked by the
```

Author: Done

> user, `device.open` simply runs all platform-specific steps to start a session

Reviewer: ```suggestion
user, `device.open()` runs all platform-specific steps to start a session
```

Author: Done

> with the USB device. Then, we have to select an available USB Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with the USB device. Then, I have to select an available USB Configuration
```

Author: Done

> with `device.selectConfiguration`. Remember that a Configuration specifies how

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with `device.selectConfiguration`. Remember that a configuration specifies how
```

Author: Done

the device is powered, its maximum power consumption and its number of

> interfaces. Talking about interfaces, we also need to request exclusive access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interfaces. Speaking of interfaces, I also need to request exclusive access
```

Author: Done

> with `device.claimInterface` since data can only be transferred to an interface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with `device.claimInterface()` since data can only be transferred to an interface
```

Author: Done

or associated endpoints when the interface is claimed. Finally calling

> `device.controlTransferOut` is needed to set up the Arduino device with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`device.controlTransferOut()` is needed to set up the Arduino device with the
```

Author: Done

appropriate commands to communicate through the WebUSB Serial API.

> From there, `device.transferIn` performs a bulk transfer onto the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From there, `device.transferIn()` performs a bulk transfer onto the
```

Author: Done

device to inform it that the host is ready to receive bulk data. Then, the
promise is fulfilled with a `result` object containing a [DataView] `data` that
has to be parsed appropriately.

> For those who are familiar with USB, all of this should look pretty familiar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're familiar with USB, all of this should look pretty familiar.
```

Author: Done

### I want more

The WebUSB API lets you interact with the all USB transfer/endpoint types:

- CONTROL transfers, used to send or receive configuration or command

>   parameters to a USB device are handled with `controlTransferIn(setup,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  parameters to a USB device, are handled with `controlTransferIn(setup,
```

Author: Done

  length)` and `controlTransferOut(setup, data)`.

> - INTERRUPT transfers, used for a small amount of time sensitive data are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- INTERRUPT transfers, used for a small amount of time sensitive data, are
```

Author: Done

  handled with the same methods as BULK transfers with
  `transferIn(endpointNumber, length)` and `transferOut(endpointNumber, data)`.

> - ISOCHRONOUS transfers, used for streams of data like video and sound are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ISOCHRONOUS transfers, used for streams of data like video and sound, are
```

Author: Done

  handled with `isochronousTransferIn(endpointNumber, packetLengths)` and
 `isochronousTransferOut(endpointNumber, data, packetLengths)`.
- BULK transfers, used to transfer a large amount of non-time-sensitive data in

>   a reliable way are handled with `transferIn(endpointNumber, length)` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  a reliable way, are handled with `transferIn(endpointNumber, length)` and
```

Author: Done

 `transferOut(endpointNumber, data)`.

> You may also want to have a look at Mike Tsao's [WebLight project] which

Reviewer: Have you verified that the project is still up?

Author: Yep. I still have some devices as well ;)

provides a ground-up example of building a USB-controlled LED device designed
for the WebUSB API (not using an Arduino here). You'll find hardware, software,
and firmware.

## Tips

> Debugging USB in Chrome is easier with the internal page `chrome://device-log`

Reviewer: Is the information on the Chrome pages up to date?

Author: Yep!

where you can see all USB device related events in one single place.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="./web-usb-device-log-page.png" class="w-screenshot"  alt="Screenshot of the device log page to debug WebUSB in Chrome">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Device log page in Chrome for debugging the WebUSB API.</figcaption>
</figure>

The internal page `chrome://usb-internals` also comes in handy and allows you

> to simulate connection connection and disconnection of virtual WebUSB devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to simulate connection connection and disconnection of virtual WebUSB devices.
```
```suggestion
to simulate connection and disconnection of virtual WebUSB devices.
```

Author: Done

> This is be useful for doing UI testing without the need for real hardware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is be useful for doing UI testing without real hardware.
```

Author: Done

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="./web-usb-internals-page.png" class="w-screenshot" alt="Screenshot of the internal page to debug WebUSB in Chrome">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Internal page in Chrome for debugging the WebUSB API.</figcaption>
</figure>

On most Linux systems, USB devices are mapped with read-only permissions by
default. To allow Chrome to open a USB device, you will need to add a new [udev
rule]. Create a file at `/etc/udev/rules.d/50-yourdevicename.rules` with the
following content:

```vim
SUBSYSTEM=="usb", ATTR{idVendor}=="[yourdevicevendor]", MODE="0664", GROUP="plugdev"
```

where `[yourdevicevendor]` is `2341` if your device is an Arduino for instance.
`ATTR{idProduct}` can also be added for a more specific rule. Make sure your

> `user` is a member of the `plugdev` group.  Then, just reconnect your device.

Reviewer: What's the `plugdev` group? How do I make sure I'm a member of it? Links will be fine.

Author: I've added a link that includes both answers.

> ## What's next

Reviewer: Does this section need to be updated? I couldn't find any features for shared or service workers on Chrome Status. I did find this: https://www.chromestatus.com/features/5928209916887040

Author: Oh I've missed this. You're right.
I've removed this "What's next" section
